Memoize is yet another package for *externalization*.  The idea is that if your
document contains stuff that doesn't change but takes a long time to compile,
you compile it once and reuse it in subsequent compilation.  The "stuff" is
usually complex TikZ pictures or Forest trees.  (Yes, I'm also the author of
Forest.)

Memoize is called as it is because the plan is to make it do more than
externalize
graphics. [Occasionally](https://tex.stackexchange.com/q/16016/16819), one also
wants to "externalize" a non-graphical result of some lengthy computation, and
that's sometimes called *memoization*. This does not work yet in this alpha
version --- the goal here was to implement a proof of concept for the idea
described below --- but it's not far away.

But why yet another externalization package?  PGF/TikZ contains an
externalization library, after all, see section 53 of the manual.

In a single compilation, TeX can produce only a single output file, but we want
each externalized picture to reside in its own file. Externalization in TikZ
therefore requires a separate compilation for externalizing each and every
picture.  While this is not a problem if you externalize as you write, but what
happens if you're editing a 1000+ pages book and you want to externalize 200+
TikZ pictures and Forest trees? You wait for hours, that's what happens.[^1]

Enter Memoize. The basic idea is very simple. A PDF can contain multiple pages,
right?  So *why not externalize all the pictures in one go, and use them by
including a specific page from a PDF?* Pure magic: the computational complexity
drops from quadratic to linear. Or in plain English, those 5 hours turn into
(less than) 5 minutes.

In more detail, memoization/externalization in Memoize works in two stages:

1. Everything that needs to be externalized is plopped right in the middle of a
   document --- during the normal compilation of the document.
   
2. When you compile the document again, all the externalized stuff is split off
   the main document into separate files, called *memos*.  
   
A memo is identified by the md5 sum of the code that produced it, so if you
change the code, the memo will be recompiled (in fact, a new memo will be
produced).

In this early version of the package, the two steps are not very flexible
yet. For example, the externalized graphics is always dumped in the middle of
your document now, but there will be an option to dump it elsewhere.  There is
already some flexibility in the second step, however. If we split off memos
using TeX, we inevitably need a separate TeX invocation to produce each memo.
--- the familiar bottleneck, even if less dramatic. To remove it, Memoize
includes a Python script (`memomanager`) which can perform the split-off step
considerably faster (from 200 * 6s to 6s), as it needs to load the document
only once.

Some other stuff is configurable as well, in particular the file structure. By
allowing you to keep the memos where you need them, Memoize can be
transparently used in complicated setups --- for example, you can (easily!) set
it up so that a compilation of an individual chapter of a book will use the
same memos as the compilation of the entire book (and vice versa).

Another thing you might like is that TikZ `overlay`s are allowed, even though
an overlay which sticks out of the bounding box a lot will require (a one-time)
manual intervention.

What about `\label`--`\ref` support, you ask?  

Bad news first: it is not yet implemented, because it falls under the more
general issue of context dependency, which is not yet implemented.  (Context
dependency will be implemented like in Forest, which features TikZ-based
externalization, but with a friendlier UI.  In principle, the idea is to define
a context, which can contain values of counters, definitions of macros etc.,
and reexternalize if
that context changes.)  

Now for the good news: preliminary experiments show that `\label`--`\ref` more
or less just works, and this includes `\pageref`s.  This is so because the
pictures are externalized during a normal compilation.

Now there's lots of stuff to be done yet before this package is ripe for
CTAN. That includes some proper documentation --- for now, I ask you to check
out the UI section of the `.sty`.  Some other things that should happen include
the following (plus, add various features of tikzexternalize, which I intend to
shamelessly copy).

TODO:

* context dependency, including label--ref support

* general memoization and multi-page externalization

* named memos

* how robust are we? do we ever lose any data due to a compilation error?  (not
  necessarily ours!)

* An option to remove memo pages from the \jobname.pdf after splitting --- no
  recompilation of the main document, but no hyperlinks either. (\pdfdraftmode
  and \pdflastximagepages will be useful here.)

* Investigate interaction with -no-pdf / \pdfdraftmode.

* option to run memomanager" from the compilation

* verbosity levels

* other engines

* ...

[^1]: This is what happened to Stefan MÃ¼ller when he was working on the [HPSG
    Handbook](https://github.com/langsci/hpsg-handbook/).  We had a nice
    symbiotic relatioship here: I save him time (at least in the long run),
    and he finds my bugs.  Thanks, Stefan!
